Add slides on random (#255)
hsf-training/cpluspluscourse: talk/morelanguage/random.tex

> %\subsection[rnd]{Random}

Author: @sponce I am fine with merging the random slides into the previous `morestl` section, but I would like to keep the slides in a separate tex file. Should I remove the comment here as well? It makes it easier to add it back later, and also serves as a reminder that we did not "just forget to add a subsection".

\subsection[a]{Random}

> %\epsdice[white]{3}

Reviewer: Not sure what this is, but does it make sense to keep commented lines ?

\begin{frame}[fragile]
  \frametitlecpp[11]{Pseudo-random number generators (PRNG)}
  \begin{block}{Concept}
    \begin{itemize}

>       \item For generating pseudo-random numbers the standard library offers:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      \item For generating pseudo-random numbers the STL offers:
```
so that it fits on the line

      \begin{itemize}
        \item engines and engine adaptors to generate pseudo random bits
        \item distributions to shape these into numbers
        \item access to (potential) hardware entropy
      \end{itemize}

>       \item Found in header \mintinline{cpp}{<random>}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      \item All found in header \mintinline{cpp}{<random>}
```

    \end{itemize}
  \end{block}

>   \begin{cppcode}
> 
>  \end{cppcode}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: yeah, I think I wanted to add an initial example here.

\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[fragile]
  \frametitlecpp[11]{Engines}
  \begin{block}{Engines}
    \begin{itemize}
      \item Generate random bits (as integers), depending on algorithm
      \item Can be seeded via constructor or \mintinline{cpp}{seed()}
      \item Algorithms: \mintinline{cpp}{linear_congruential_engine}, \mintinline{cpp}{mersenne_twister_engine}, \mintinline{cpp}{subtract_with_carry_engine}
      \item Adaptors: \mintinline{cpp}{discard_block_engine}, \mintinline{cpp}{independent_bits_engine}, \mintinline{cpp}{shuffle_order_engine}

>       \item Aliases (use these): \mintinline{cpp}{minstd_rand0}, \mintinline{cpp}{minstd_rand}, \mintinline{cpp}{mt19937}, \mintinline{cpp}{mt19937_64}, \mintinline{cpp}{ranlux24}, \mintinline{cpp}{ranlux48}, \mintinline{cpp}{knuth_b}, \mintinline{cpp}{default_random_engine}

Reviewer: maybe use small font for the names so that it fits on 2 lines less, Then you have space for a header of an example block at the bottom, with title "Typical code" or so

    \end{itemize}
  \end{block}
  \begin{cppcode}

>     int seed = ...;

Reviewer: Why a separate line and not 
```
   std::default_random_engine engine{...};
```
?
I would put a single line if possible and explain why it's not if it's not.

Author: Because I wanted to mention that the constructor arguments are for seeding. I will use a comment instead.

>     std::default_random_engine engine{seed};

Reviewer: You're using in the example the only one you did not mention before :-)
And you do not say what it maps too (or that it's not specified if it's not)

Author: I did mention `std::default_random_engine`, if this is what you mean :) I will point out that it aliases one of the other engines.

    auto i = engine(); // operator(): random integer
 \end{cppcode}
\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[fragile]

>   \frametitlecpp[11]{Random device}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  \frametitlecpp[11]{Random device and determinism}
```

>   \begin{block}{Random device}
>     \begin{itemize}
>       \item PRNGs will produce the same numbers for the same seed
>       \item PRNGs are \emph{deterministic} (may be useful or not)
>       \item To get different numbers on each run, we must provide a truly random number as seed
>       \item \mintinline{cpp}{std::random_device} provides \emph{non-deterministic} random numbers
>       \item It uses hardware provided entropy, if available
>       \item It may become slow when called too often (e.g. when hardware entropy pool is exhausted)
>       \item Use it only to seed a PRNG!
>     \end{itemize}
>   \end{block}
>   \begin{cppcode}
>     std::random_device rd;
>     auto seed = rd();
>     std::default_random_engine engine{seed};
>  \end{cppcode}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  \begin{block}{Random devices are deterministic}
    \begin{itemize}
      \item PRNGs will produce the same numbers for the same seed
      \item PRNGs are \emph{deterministic} (may be useful or not)
    \end{itemize}
  \end{block}
  \begin{block}{\texttt{std::random_device} provides \emph{non-deterministic} random numbers}
    \begin{itemize}
      \item It uses hardware provided entropy, if available
      \item It may become slow when called too often (e.g. when hardware entropy pool is exhausted)
      \item Use it only to seed a PRNG and get non-deterministic random numbers from it
    \end{itemize}
    \begin{cppcode}
      std::random_device rd;
      auto seed = rd();
      std::default_random_engine engine{seed};
   \end{cppcode}
  \end{block}
```

Author: I applied a variation of your suggestion.

\end{frame}

\begin{frame}[fragile]
  \frametitlecpp[11]{Distributions}
  \begin{block}{Distributions}
    \begin{itemize}
      \item Take random bits from engines and shape them into numbers

>       \item Standard library provides a lot of them, including uniform, bernoulli, poisson, normal and sampling distributions
>       \item See \href{https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/numeric/random}{cppreference} for the full list

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      \item Standard library provides a lot of them
      \begin{itemize}
      \item uniform, bernoulli, poisson, normal and sampling distributions
      \item See \href{https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/numeric/random}{cppreference} for the full list
```

    \end{itemize}
  \end{block}

>   \begin{cppcode}
>     std::random_device rd;
>     std::default_random_engine engine{rd()};
> 
>     std::normal_distribution<double> dist(5.0, 1.5); // µ, σ
>     double r = dist(engine); // random normally dist. value
> 
>     std::uniform_int_distribution<int> dist2(0, 10);
>     std::vector<int> v(100);
>     for (auto& e : v)
>       e = dist2(engine);
>  \end{cppcode}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  \begin{exampleblock}{Example code}
  \begin{cppcode}
    std::random_device rd;
    std::default_random_engine engine{rd()};

    std::normal_distribution<double> dist{5.0, 1.5}; // µ, σ
    double r = dist(engine); // random normally dist. value

    std::uniform_int_distribution<int> dist2{0, 10};
    std::vector<int> v(100);
    std::generate(begin(v), end(v), [&](){ return dist2(engine); });
 \end{cppcode}
 \end{exampleblock}
```

Reviewer: And drop empty lines if it does not fit, or go to smaller font

Author: `std::generate` is a good idea!
